Module Federation Documentation. (#1253)
plone/documentation: docs/classic-ui/module-federation.md

  "description": "How to use Module Federation in Mockup and add-on bundles."
  "property=og:description": "How to use Module Federation in Mockup and add-on bundles."
  "property=og:title": "Module Federation in Mockup"
  "keywords": "Plone, Classic UI, classic-ui, Mockup, mockup, Module Federation, Webpack, JavaScript"
---

(classic-ui-module-federation-in-mockup-label)=

# Module Federation in Mockup

## Introduction

For a general introduction see: https://webpack.js.org/concepts/module-federation/

Module Federation allows to share dependencies between bundles. 
Each bundle includes the whole set of dependencies.
However, if multiple bundles have the same dependencies they are only loaded once.

For example, if bundle A and B both depend on jQuery and bundle A has already loaded it, bundle B can just reuse the already loaded jQuery file.
But if only bundle B is loaded, it uses its own bundled version of the jQuery library.

There is a host bundle - in the fictional example above our bundle "A".
In Plone the host bundle is the main mockup bundle.
Addons can add bundles called "remotes" which are initialized for module federation by the host bundle.

## Using module federation

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This instruction is for you if you created an add-on with a Mockup pattern and you want to include the respective Javascript code in your theme code.
```

---
html_meta:
  "description": "How to use Module Federation in Mockup and add-on bundles."
  "property=og:description": "How to use Module Federation in Mockup and add-on bundles."
  "property=og:title": "Module Federation in Mockup"
  "keywords": "Plone, Classic UI, classic-ui, Mockup, mockup, Module Federation, Webpack, JavaScript"
---

(classic-ui-module-federation-in-mockup-label)=

# Module Federation in Mockup

> ## Introduction

Reviewer 2: This heading is unnecessary.

```suggestion
```

> For a general introduction see: https://webpack.js.org/concepts/module-federation/

Reviewer 2: I would like to move this to the end of this section, just before the next subheading of "Using module federation".

Let's convert it to a `seealso` directive.

````suggestion
```{seealso}
Webpack's documentation on [Module Federation](https://webpack.js.org/concepts/module-federation/).
```
````

> Module Federation allows to share dependencies between bundles.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Module Federation allows sharing of dependencies between bundles.
```

Each bundle includes the whole set of dependencies.
However, if multiple bundles have the same dependencies they are loaded only once.

For example, if bundle A and B both depend on jQuery and bundle A has already loaded it, bundle B can just reuse the already loaded jQuery file.
But if only bundle B is loaded, it uses its own bundled version of the jQuery library.

> There is a host bundle - in the fictional example above our bundle "A".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is a host bundle, as in the fictional example above, our bundle A.
```

In Plone the host bundle is the main mockup bundle.

> Addons can add bundles called "remotes" which are initialized for module federation by the host bundle.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add-ons can add bundles called "remotes" which are initialized for module federation by the host bundle.
```

## Using module federation

> This instruction is for you if you created an add-on with a Mockup pattern and you want to include the respective JavaScript code in your theme code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following instructions are for you if you created an add-on with a Mockup pattern and you want to include the respective JavaScript code in your theme code.
```

> Starting with the webpack configuration that you get when creating a barceloneta theme package via [plonecli][1], add the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting with the webpack configuration that you get when creating a Barceloneta theme package via [plonecli][1], add the following:
```

> - Create a new entry point `index.js` which only imports the normal entry point.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create a new entry point `index.js` which only imports the normal entry point.
```

Reviewer 2: With only two list items, I would remove the `-`. This also avoids the requirement of indenting everything to align with the list item.

```js
import("./patterns");

> ```

Reviewer 2: If you ignore the previous suggestion, code blocks within list items should be indented to align with the first letter of the list item.

> - Add the module federation plugin in webpack.config.js. There is a configuration factory `mf_config` which you can use for that. Add the following line near the top of the file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next add the module federation plugin in `webpack.config.js`.
There is a configuration factory `mf_config` which you can use for that.
Add the following line near the top of the file:
```

```js
const mf_config = require("@patternslib/dev/webpack/webpack.mf");
```

Then find the following line:

```js
    config = patternslib_config(env, argv, config, ["mockup"]);
```

Below this line add the following:

```js
    config.plugins.push(
        mf_config({
            filename: "myaddon-remote.min.js",
            package_json: package_json,
            remote_entry: config.entry["myaddon.min"],
        })
    );
```

> Replace `myaddon-remote.min.js` with the file name you want to use for your remote bundle. Replace `myaddon.min` with the corresponding key in `config.entry` that points to your `index.js`.

Reviewer 2: One sentence per line.

```suggestion
Replace `myaddon-remote.min.js` with the file name you want to use for your remote bundle.
Replace `myaddon.min` with the corresponding key in `config.entry` that points to your `index.js`.
```

[1]: https://pypi.org/project/plonecli/

## Special case: global modules `jQuery` and `Bootstrap`

> In order to preserve compatibility with older addons and JavaScript implementations,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to preserve compatibility with older add-ons and JavaScript implementations,
```

---
html_meta:
  "description": "How to use Module Federation in Mockup and add-on bundles."
  "property=og:description": "How to use Module Federation in Mockup and add-on bundles."
  "property=og:title": "Module Federation in Mockup"
  "keywords": "Plone, Classic UI, classic-ui, Mockup, mockup, Module Federation, Webpack, JavaScript"
---

(classic-ui-module-federation-in-mockup-label)=

# Module Federation in Mockup

```{seealso}
Webpack's documentation on [Module Federation](https://webpack.js.org/concepts/module-federation/).

> ```

Reviewer 2: Please move the above part after the content for this section, after "Add-ons can add bundles called "remotes" which are initialized for module federation by the host bundle." and before "## Using module federation". We need an introduction before showing a link to an external site.

Module Federation allows sharing of dependencies between bundles.
Each bundle includes the whole set of dependencies.
However, if multiple bundles have the same dependencies they are loaded only once.

For example, if bundle A and B both depend on jQuery and bundle A has already loaded it, bundle B can just reuse the already loaded jQuery file.
But if only bundle B is loaded, it uses its own bundled version of the jQuery library.

There is a host bundle, as in the fictional example above, our bundle A.
In Plone the host bundle is the main mockup bundle.
Add-ons can add bundles called "remotes" which are initialized for module federation by the host bundle.

## Using module federation

> The following instructions are for you if you created an add-on with a Mockup pattern and you want to include the respective JavaScript code in your theme code.

Reviewer: I landed here and want to know how to write a Mockup pattern. Where can I find instructions? Link?

Reviewer: This imaginary theme/add-on creator question and the ones below can be answered in other chapters. 
If you read this and think this is your topic: Feel free to take over PR https://github.com/plone/documentation/pull/1275

> Starting with the webpack configuration that you get when creating a Barceloneta theme package via [plonecli][1], add the following:

Reviewer: If I create a new addon and add a Barceloneta theme via plonecli, I do not see a webpack configuration.
plonecli 2.2
bobtemplates.plone: 6.0b12
```
plonecli create addon abc.mytheme
plonecli add theme_barceloneta
```

> Create a new entry point `index.js` which only imports the normal entry point.

Reviewer: Where do I have to create this file?

```js
import("./patterns");
```

Next add the module federation plugin in `webpack.config.js`.
There is a configuration factory `mf_config` which you can use for that.
Add the following line near the top of the file:

```js
const mf_config = require("@patternslib/dev/webpack/webpack.mf");
```

Then find the following line:

```js
    config = patternslib_config(env, argv, config, ["mockup"]);
```

Below this line add the following:

```js
    config.plugins.push(
        mf_config({
            filename: "myaddon-remote.min.js",
            package_json: package_json,
            remote_entry: config.entry["myaddon.min"],
        })
    );
```

> Replace `myaddon-remote.min.js` with the file name you want to use for your remote bundle.

Reviewer: Is `myaddon-remote.min.js` generated? How is it generated and where do I have to place the source file?

> Replace `myaddon-remote.min.js` with the file name you want to use for your remote bundle.

Reviewer: What means remote in this context and what would be a non-remote? I thought this instruction is about applying the js code of my addon, so some local code.

> Replace `myaddon.min` with the corresponding key in `config.entry` that points to your `index.js`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace the key of `config.entry` that points to your `index.js` with the name of your add-on.
```

> 

Reviewer: Do I need to run a compile script or is a restart of Plone enough?

Addons can add bundles called "remotes" which are initialized for module federation by the host bundle.

## Using module federation

> This instruction is for you if you created an add-on with a Mockup pattern and you want to include the respective Javascript code in your theme code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This instruction is for you if you created an add-on with a Mockup pattern and you want to include the respective JavaScript code in your theme code.
```

const mf_config = require("@patternslib/dev/webpack/webpack.mf");
```

Import all the dependencies you want to share.

> Potentially these are the ones from Patternslib, Mockup and your own dependencies.

Reviewer 2: When a term is first introduced on a page, we must either define it or provide a reference to its meaning, either with a Glossary entry or a link to an external website where it is defined. Please amend the link to whatever is preferred.

I also noticed that I overlooked that Mockup lacks a definition or reference when it is was first introduced, so that should be done above as well.

```suggestion
Potentially these are the ones from [Patternslib](https://github.com/Patternslib/pat-PATTERN_TEMPLATE), Mockup, and your own dependencies.
```

You can just add the Patternslib and Mockup dependencies, even if you are not using them.

```js
const package_json = require("./package.json");
const package_json_mockup = require("@plone/mockup/package.json");
const package_json_patternslib = require("@patternslib/patternslib/package.json");
```

Then find the following line:

```js
    config = patternslib_config(env, argv, config, ["@plone/mockup"]);
```

Below this line add the following:

```js
    config.plugins.push(
        mf_config({
            name: "myaddon",
            filename: "myaddon-remote.min.js",
            remote_entry: config.entry["myaddon.min"],
            dependencies: {
                ...package_json_patternslib.dependencies,
                ...package_json_mockup.dependencies,
                ...package_json.dependencies,
            },
        })
    );
```

> Replace the name `myaddon` with your addon bundle's name (any unique name will do...),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Replace the name `myaddon` with your add-on bundle's unique name.
```

> replace the filename `myaddon-remote.min.js` with the file name you want to use for your remote bundle,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Replace the filename `myaddon-remote.min.js` with the file name you want to use for your remote bundle.
```

> and replace `myaddon.min` with the corresponding key in `config.entry` that points to your `index.js`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally replace `myaddon.min` with the corresponding key in `config.entry` that points to your `index.js`.
```

> For a full but simple example, see the Patterns generator [pat-PATTERN-TEMPLATE][2] or any other Pattern addon in the patternslib GitHub organisation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a full but simple example, see the Patterns generator [pat-PATTERN-TEMPLATE][2] or any other Pattern add-on in the [patternslib GitHub organization](https://github.com/patternslib/).
```

> For a complex example with Mockup integration see [plone.app.mosaic][3] and [Mockup][4] itself.

Reviewer 2: This suggestion is optional. In general, I prefer to keep the URL next to its label as in `[label](https://url.com/path)`, instead of this reference style. They both render the same for readers. But for authors it has advantages:

- Simpler syntax.
- It associates the label with the link directly, instead of requiring the author to scroll down to reference it.
- When a link is broken, `linkcheck` and `linkcheckbroken` refer to the line of the label, not the URL, in the error, so you would see something like `classic-ui/module-federation: line   31) broken    https://pypi.org/project/plonecli-404/ - 404 Client Error: Not Found for url: https://pypi.org/project/plonecli-404/`
- Preferred by most authors.

Perhaps that style was carried over from the dogma of keeping line lengths to 80 characters. In narrative documentation, line length does not matter. It is not code and most editors can soft wrap long lines of text these days.

Replace `myaddon-remote.min.js` with the file name you want to use for your remote bundle. Replace `myaddon.min` with the corresponding key in `config.entry` that points to your `index.js`.

[1]: https://pypi.org/project/plonecli/

> ## Special case: global modules ``jQuery`` and ``Bootstrap``

Reviewer 2: Markdown uses single backticks for inline literals.

```suggestion
## Special case: global modules `jQuery` and `Bootstrap`
```

In order to preserve compatibility with older addons and JavaScript implementations,

> the modules ``jQuery`` and ``Bootstrap`` are stored in the  global ``window`` namespace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the modules `jQuery` and `Bootstrap` are stored in the  global `window` namespace.
```

So constructs like the following are still working:

> ```

Reviewer 2: Add the lexer.

````suggestion
```js
````
